DALS: A dynamic app-loading system for the kernel (#2190)
tock/tock: capsules/src/dals/README.md

Dynamic App-Loading System (DALS)
=================================

## Description

This document introduces the design for a novel system named **DALS** which allows 
the Kernel to dynamically (at runtime) load and run apps.  The data for a new app 
to be loaded and run by Tock is transmitted to a Tock-compatible board through any 
standard  communication protocol (BLE, Zigbee, USB, etc.) which provides "acks" or a similar service
to lower data rates.  This data is then pushed 
segment-by-segment through **DALS** which places it in an empty space in flash space and
then sets up the process-specific elements for the newly-loaded app.

## Design

The design of **DALS** consists of a series of capsules with one capsule, the **AppLoader**, considered

> to be trusted.  This main trusted capsule is the heart of **DALS** and contains the code which collects

Reviewer: Several months ago, on the core WG call, we discussed the "capsule" terminology and whether or not a capsule can be trusted ([notes](https://github.com/tock/tock/blob/master/doc/wg/core/notes/core-notes-2020-04-03.md)). We came to the conclusion that "capsule" never refers to code that the core kernel trusts. You are correct to state that some component of the DALS [must be trusted by the core kernel](https://github.com/tock/tock/blob/master/doc/threat_model/Application_Loader.md).

Based on those discussions, I think the trusted code should live outside the "capsules" directory. The rest of DALS -- the code that doesn't need to be trusted under Tock's threat model -- can be in capsules.

Author: Hmmm... @bradjc would you agree with moving the "trusted code" outside of the capsules directory?

Reviewer 2: Yes this is a good point. Something needs to check that the start of the app header is valid when it is written to flash. One way to do this would be to embed that check in the implementation of the flash interface given to DALS. Something (very roughly) like:

```rust
impl NonvolatileStorage for AppFlashWriter {
    fn write(offset, buffer, len) {
        if offset < 8 {
            // make sure header in buffer is valid
        } else {...}
    }
    ...
}
```

That implementation would 1) confine the app to loading only in the flash space allocated for the incoming app, and 2) verify that the start of the TBF header it writes to flash has the correct version and length.

The code outlined in this PR would then be untrusted, and the trust lies in a proper sandboxed nonvolatile storage interface being provided to DALS.

the raw app data from another capsule, moves it through a pipeline of steps, places the
resulting app binary in an empty slot in flash space, and, finally, sets up its process-memory region
so the scheduler can run it at the appropriate time.

Basic Pipeline at the core of **DALS**.

Collect raw data from peripheral capsule (BLE, Zigbee, etc.) -----> Decompress Data  ----->  Find empty slot in flash --- 

> ---> Verify Data ------> Validate Data ----> Set up process-specific structures (stack, heap, etc.)

Reviewer 3: Some of these happen in parallel right? Maybe there is a better way to illustrate that

                                                 |
                         Validator ---------  AppLoader  ----------  Decompressor
                                                 |
                                                 |
                                                 |
                                                 |
                                              Verifier
                                        

There exists a circular reference between the **AppLoader** capsule and each of the peripheral
capsules.  This enables the **AppLoader** to call functions implemented by a peripheral capsule and 
vice versa.

The peripheral modules are detailed below.  Please see `interfaces.rs` for more information on functions and such.

## AppLoaderClient

This capsule implements `pub trait AppLoaderClient<'a>`.  This capsule can be any capsule
which receives data via standard communication protocols for embedded systems such as BLE, 
Zigbee, USB.  This capsule's main function is to send this raw received data buffer-by-buffer
to the **AppLoader** capsule.  In order to prevent bottleneck issues, this capsule must send an ack 

> only after its buffer is returned to it from the **AppLoader**.

Reviewer 4: This may not be possible for arbitrary communication protocols. For example 802.15.4 expects an ACK within 1-2 ms or an automatic retry will be triggered, and Zigbee will give up on a MAC layer retransmissions (after sending 5x) after 37 ms. It seems that this realistically will create a requirement for higher layer flow control (i.e. use of TCP or similar).

Even for BLE, I don't think our current BLE stack supports L2CAP flow control, which is the only way I know of to achieve this.

Author: Sorry for missing this.  @bradjc and I seem converged on the idea of leaving this "traffic control" idea up to the actual protocol instead.  Obviously since there does not seem to be a one size fit all solution.  For protocols such as 802.15.4 for which timing is an issue, we think it is best to leave this problem up to the system designer.

This capsule must also include a buffer the size of one data segment (different for different protocols) which
it sends to the **AppLoader** to send one segment of the received data.

> ## Decompressor

Reviewer 3: Does the decompressor write the data to flash?

Author: No. the decompressor will put the decompressed data into a buffer which AppLoader will read from.  Ill make it clearer in the README.

**DALS** support data decompression methods which "operate on-the-fly".  That is, the received app data
is decompressed segment-by-segment. This capsule must implement `pub trait Decompressor<'a>` and contain 
a decompression algorithm which conforms to the above constraints.

This capsule must include a buffer in which to store the resulting decompressed data which is passed
back to the **AppLoader**.

> ## Verifier

Reviewer 3: What happens if the data isn't valid? It's already in flash, is it erased is the packet re-sent?

Author: @bradjc and I discussed that the flash memory used will be deallocated if checks do not pass and an error will propagate up the stack towards the AppLoaderClient implementing capsule.  At that point, that capsule can choose how to handle the error (re-send some packets, give up, etc.)

Reviewer 3: Ok, can you make that clearer here?

Author: Sure.

This capsule implements `pub trait Verifier<'a>`.  This capsule contains an algorithm which can
perform data verification on the app data loaded into flash.  Such an algorithm could be used to 
verify that no bit-errors occured during wireless transmission or that the loaded app is not malware.
Examples of this include checksums, digital signatures or more complex cryptographic computations.

> This capsule must contain an immutable reference to the app binary data in flash space.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This capsule must accept an immutable reference to the app binary data in flash space.
```
Maybe? It seems like this capsule would not always own such a reference but just receive it as part of the interaction with the `AppLoader`

> ## Validator

Reviewer 3: Crypto checks would probably occur here, to make sure the app matches signatures that we allow to run for example.

Author: @bradjc and I discussed we think its a good idea to leave crypto checks in Verification stage.  Validation stage is designed to be more based around system designer policies.  For example, the user/designer could institute a policy to not run apps which need x, y, or z hardware resources.  Verification is geared more towards running some algorithm on the whole app binary in flash which checks for bit-errors or digital signature matches.  Let me know if this works.

Reviewer 3: Won't a signature require the entire app to be loaded though?

Author: Sorry for missing this.  The pipeline is loading --> decompressing --> verification --> validation.  After the decompressing phase the `AppLoader` will write the app binary into flash space.  The verification phase can then process on the app binary data in flash to perform any crypto checks/signature-checking.

> This capsule implements `pub trait Validator<'a>`.  This capsule contains an algorithm which 
> performs validation on the app data in flash according to a user specification.  It could check the 
> app's length, version, or header info for any salient features.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This capsule implements `pub trait Validator<'a>`.  This capsule contains an algorithm which 
performs validation on the app data in flash according to a user specification. This allows the
kernel to check if it actually wants to run the newly loaded app. The validator can check the 
app's length, version, or header info for any salient features.
```
